Brazil is the biggest country in South America, with an area of 8,512,000 km2. The country has a 214 million population and most of them live in urban areas. Currently, there are a total of 4140 municipalities in Brazil (World Population Review, 2021). In 2016, Brazil experienced 802,249 suspected cases of dengue fever, 63,810 conﬁrmed cases of chikungunya, and 64,311 conﬁrmed cases of Zika fever in 1840 municipalities (MS, 2019).  Dengue fever, chikungunya, and Zika are primarily caused by Arboviruses which is due to the spread of Aedes aegypti and Aedes albocpitus mosquitos (Kyle and Harris, 2008; Paupy et al., 2010). Higher infestation levels of Aedes in Brazil is related with highly populated neighborhoods and tropical weather in which increase proliferation of potential mosquitos’ breeding sites (Tauil 2001, Luz et al. 2003).  The weather of Brazil is tropical and this is suitable for the dissemination of zoonosis caused by arthropod-borne viruses (Figueiredo, 2003).

To prepare the country for the re-emergence of the diseases, it is crucial to understand the historical distribution of Aedes occurrences and measuring the potential risk that might be established based on habitat suitability variables. Therefore, this study aims to map and model Aedes habitat suitability through the following objectives: (1) map the risk based on historical Aedes mosquitos occurrences, (2) map the environmental suitability variables and (3) develop relationship model to know how habitat suitability variables influence Aedes mosquitos occurrences. 

This study provides the map and relationship model of Aedes habitat suitability in Brazil. Result shows that on December, low precipitation and high density of population significantly influence the number of Aedes occurrences. However, temperature is not statistically significant in affecting the occurrences of Aedes on December. Based on the model and previous study, the author found 14 municipalities that have high suitability on Aedes occurrences. This finding is important as basis to take prevention and preparedness action in national or regional scale. In addition, this study demonstrates the utility of high-gridded data as approach in identifying risk area of health disaster, which is really potential to be used in other mosquito-borne diseases.

